title: "To TDD, Or Not?"
date: 2015-05-07 11:22:35
tags:
- methodology
- practice
categories: Opinion
---
One of the things bouncing around the Internet around the time I began to consider starting a blog was the debate over test driven development (TDD) as a measure of professionalism.  I find I am an empiricist when it comes to arguing about development methodology after so many years of doing devleopment, which means I consider much of what is debated as vain efforts in convincing people to have the "correct opinion."  Yet, as with most things, I do have to make a decision about what I personally am going to practice in my personal effort to produce high quality code.

In addition, because of the type of code I tend to write, I have issues with some practices such as code reviews since reviewing the multithreaded, concurrent programs and data structures I write requires a skill set and level of expertise that is not common among my peers or developers in general.  It isn't that code reviews don't help, but I find that most of the value comes not from others input, comments, or finding errors, but, rather, from the effort I have to undertake to explain the code which causes me to examine it in depth in order to be able to explicate it to others.  So I am constantly looking for techniques that help me to examine, analyze, and force me to thoroughly walk through my own code in order for it to be as correct as possible.  With my current [project](https://github.com/bkarr/libshr), I find I am even more on my own since it hasn't attracted much attention, and I find myself even more dependent on my own self review.

So as I previously alluded, I find the arguments over TDD largely evidence free, and, therefore, largely arguments over opninions and preferences.  To make TDD a hallmark of professionalism, I find a ridiculous assertion that reduces the practice of programming to mere domatic religion.  The only measure of professionalism I find that makes sense is the actual production of high quality, error free code, regardless of how it was produced.  That does not mean don't find value in unit testing and some value in writing tests before writing code, but there is very little actual evidence that TDD itself produces well-designed and correct code over and above any other practice.  Frankly, the more I listen to some of Leslie Lamport's recent [presentations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6QsTfL-uXd8&feature=youtu.be) about specifying systems and thinking before coding, I find his views on what should be practiced much more compelling as a measure of professionalism, even though I question how well they would scale as formal methods haven't proven economical in practice for most development efforts.

As it stands, my current practice is to mix writing unit tests both before and after coding.  I find that writing some simple, initial unit tests to exercise the major functions on their "happy path" the fastest way to get something working, which gives that initial, positive feedback I think that programmers find so motivating.  I also find, though, a lot of value in writing most of my unit tests after writing the majority of the code as it forces me to examine the various paths through the code in a thorough fashion.  I find the activity of writing thorough unit tests that exercise especially the error paths a valuable exercise as a form of self-directed code review.  
